Question 0: Who renamed "Jynx", a play on the word "jinx"?
Answer 0: As a result, they were renamed "Jynx", a play on the word "jinx".


Answer 1: Jynx, known in Japan as Rougela (ルージュラ, Rūjura), is a Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak's Pokémon franchise.


Answer 2: In Pokémon Red and Blue and their remakes, Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen, Jynx is a rare Pokémon that is only available through trading with an in-game NPC.
BERT ANSWER: Answer not found!




Question 1:  What was the original color of Jynx's skin?
Answer 0: Originally portrayed with a black face and hands, Jynx's design was changed to purple coloration after critiques that it perpetuated racism.
BERT ANSWER: purple


Question 2:  Who reffered to Jynx as the "infamous blackface Pokémon?
Answer 0: Children's book author and cultural critic Carole Boston Weatherford published an article in the Greensboro News & Record alleging that Jynx's design bore a striking resemblance to blackface actors, an image considered racist against black people, and further described the Pokémon as "a dead ringerfor an obese drag queen."


Answer 1: which, in an article discussing the "lamest Pokémon" of the series, referred to it as the "infamous blackface Pokémon".


Answer 2: Jynx's design and humanoid appearance has been heavily criticized by the Western media, most notably by cultural critic Carole Boston Weatherford, who described Jynx as representing blackface after seeing the character's depiction in the anime.
BERT ANSWER: Carole Boston Weatherford


Question 3:  When did Jynx first appear in Pokémon anime?
Answer 0: Created by Ken Sugimori, Jynx first appeared in the video games Pokémon Red and Blue and subsequent sequels, later appearing in various merchandise, spinoff titles, or animated and printed adaptations of the franchise.


Answer 1: Jynx first appeared in the Pokémon anime in Holiday Hi-Jynx when one of Santa Claus's Jynx was separated from him and Ash and friends helped to return the Jynx to her owner.
BERT ANSWER: Holiday Hi - Jynx


Question 4:  What is the Japanese name of Jynx?
Answer 0: Jynx, known in Japan as Rougela (ルージュラ, Rūjura), is a Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak's Pokémon franchise.
BERT ANSWER: Rougela


Question 5:  What is a rare Pokémon that is only available through trading with an in-game NPC?
Answer 0: Originally called "Rougela" in Japanese, Nintendo decided to give the various Pokémon species "clever and descriptive names" related to their appearance or features, when translating the game for western audiences, as a means to make the characters more relatable to American children.


Answer 1: GameDaily ranked it first on their list of the "Top 10 Weirdest Looking Pokémon", noting its design suggested the presence of breasts, and echoing qualms regarding its resemblance to blackface performers.


Answer 2: GamesRadar editor Carolyn Gudmundson listed "Humanoid" as one of the most overused Pokémon designs, listing Jynx and Mr. Mime as one of "the most infamous" examples.
BERT ANSWER: Answer not found!